this week's guest is rert sheldrick a
brilliant scientist in the worlds of
parapsychology Consciousness and
biological systems his work has been
widely criticized as pseudo science by
people too lazy to look into his
protocols and too dogmatically mired and
materialist reductionism to be open to
its profound implications sheldrick has
spent decades showing that humans and
animals can learn things from their
surrounding information fields or as he
calls them more fields that babies can
sense when their mothers are near that
humans know beyond A Reasonable Doubt
when we're being stared at and that
animals can sense earthquakes and other
natural disasters most of these things
are things that children Inuit it and
often know are true they are also all
things that we have experienced many
times in our lives if we're being honest
with ourselves but we live in the age of
disenchantment of rationalism of your
eyes are playing tricks on you don't
trust your mind so we are taught to
override our everyday experience in
sensory phenomenology with materialist
Dogma that says that the universe is
random that we only have four physical
forces that attenuate over space and
time and that DNA is the only mechanism
of inherited information transfer in
biological beings sheldrake pokes holes
in Darwin and natural selection but also
shows that the Neo darwinian like Dawkin
aren't even true followers of Darwin he
shows that the physical constants in
physics are some sometimes actually
averages of fluctuating measurements
he's basically a nightmare for the
Priestly Citadel of modern academic
scientists and all the more so because
he's Cambridge educated and Harvard
Affiliated many conventional scientists
ignore or actively dislike sheldrick but
more often than not they secretly admire
his boldness willingness to work outside
the Beltway and follow his intuition
among an elite intelligencia that is
overeducated and taught what to think
and not how to think sheldrake is a rare
gadfly rarely are Skeptics able to
debunk his protocols their misgivings
are generally summed up by but that
can't be so but as you'll see in this
interview sheldrake is an eloquent
defender of his experiment in 2013 rert
sheldrick's Ted Talk was censored and
taken off YouTube because in Ted's
opinion while science has not moved far
in solving the riddle of Consciousness
sheldrake's ideas are so radical and far
removed from the mainstream scientific
thinking that we think it's right for us
to give these talks a clear health
warning besides the absurdly
condescending nature of these statements
do we really think that if we ever get
to some ultimate Theory Of Consciousness
that it wouldn't drastically deviate
from the modern scientific mainstream
why do we assume that it would be mere
punctuation at the end of a sentence
we've already written what sort of
hubris does that involve that is usually
not how science works we did this
interview in his beautiful home in
Hampstead in London and I was fresh off
having just debated scientific skeptic
Michael shurmer in Italy and so I was
extra fired up to speak to a fellow
heretic in sheldrick in this
conversation we discussed the truth
behind
electromagnetism the sense of being
stared at how Consciousness exists
outside one's mind and why so many
people have false Impressions about AI
we also get into his long close
friendship with the legendary Terrence
McKenna finally we even get into one of
his trippiest but less well-known books
the physics of angels which explores
traditional conceptions of angels and
how they might work in a modern
scientific context obviously this has
big implications for the modern UFO
conversation so without further Ado sit
back and enjoy this wide- ranging
conversation with today's scientific
heretic but tomorrow's scientific hero
rert sheldrick
I'm here with one of my heroes rert
sheldrake uh you know my show is sort of
known for actually exploring phenomenal
like UFOs but uh people probably don't
know that I was actually originally
interested in parapsychology and Mind
Over Matter effects and that's mainly
attributable to you my father was a
massive fan of yours the whole show uh
you know I can I have you to thank for
and we met um six years ago and uh you
know it was an honor to meet then and
it's an honor to do this now and um you
have uh traditional academic credentials
and that's why I think you piss off
Academia so much because you've really
uh gone off on your own path and uh
explored all sorts of exciting phenomena
that lay outside of kind of conventional
models and so uh I'm excited to be here
and the final thing I'll say is actually
I have you to thank for uh my my job
because uh in my first conversation with
with Peter Peter teal who I ended up
working for I brought you up and he was
is like I think he remember I remember
him kind of looking at me and and with
like a you know specific face where he's
like oh this this guy's kind of you know
a little he's into he's into rer
sheldrick he's a little weird like in a
good
way and so you know I always I always
say that when people are like why did he
hire you I'm like I don't know to this
day but I did bring up rer shelrick well
that certainly a surprise
yes why is that a
surprise I didn't know what sorts of
things he was interested in and I'm
surprised he was interested in my own
work well I think generically he's
interested in people who think
differently and are cons he's always
looking for who the modern heretic is
because that's always hard to spot it's
easy to spot the historical heretic and
I think uh you know they get Vindicated
over time and even as an investment
thesis it's probably not bad to you know
do that as a mental exercise and so
you'd be good candidate for that I don't
know if you take that as a compliment
but I mean it as a compliment yes all
right yeah
um well thank you for having us and uh I
guess why why don't we start with do you
think Consciousness is sort of this
irreducible prime mover it's like the
it's the fundamental layer is is
consciousness is that would that
describe your sort of world view well no
I'm not I'm not I don't don't think of
myself as an idealist the idea that
Consciousness is primary and everything
is ultimately Consciousness is called
idealism it's the Mirror oppos Mirror
Image or the exact opposite of
materialism yeah materialism says
everything's matter yeah and even when
you get Consciousness like in human
brains it's basically just matter and
it's not really doing anything um
whereas idealism says everything's
Consciousness and matter is sort of
dumbed down mind um uh so materialism
has a problem explaining Consciousness
and I think idealism has a problem
explaining matter CU it's not exactly
clear how Consciousness could give rise
to electrons and atoms and salt crystals
and and and trees and things so uh I
don't think that it's I don't find
either of those philosophies
particularly helpful um I spent a lot of
time thinking about how Consciousness
might be related to electromagnetic
fields and that's one reason that in
recent the last few years I've been
particularly interested in the nature of
vision because in Vision um everyone
agrees that this depends on the
electromagnetic field um you know when I
see you now the light that's coming into
my eyes is traveling through the
electromagnetic field light is
electromagnetic
radiation
um
somehow I'm forming an image of view
sitting there um as a result of the
light that comes into my eyes and the
official theory is the light comes into
my eyes inverted images on the retinas
changes in the ganglia up the optic
nerve changes in the visual regions of
the brain and then all that's clear
enough has been studied you can measure
it and all that you can have brain scans
no problem about that but then the
question is how do I form an image of
you and the official Theory would be
that somewhere inside my brain I produce
a
three-dimensional full color virtual
reality display inside my head and and
that my image of you is actually inside
my head there's a little Jesse somewhere
inside my head wearing a red t-shirt and
stuff it's all inside my head and it's
only an illusion that my image of you is
where you seem to be well what I'm
saying is that that theory which is
believed and believed with passionate
intensity by a lot of people within
institutional science without a shred of
evidence I mean no one's ever seen a
virtual reality display inside the head
um what I'm saying is that bizarre
theory that is all inside the brain um
is not backed up by evidence and much
more persuasive is the idea that's
believed in by virtually everyone in the
world except scientific intellectuals in
Western universities um um including
children under the age of 10 what
everyone else believes is that when
light comes in changes happen in the
mind mind in the brain and then the
images are projected out so my image of
you is exactly where it seems to be it's
in 3D in full color but it's located
right where you're sitting and it
overlaps with you as it were and so
every I see is projected out of my mind
so my mind is extended beyond my brain
filling the whole world around me well
this would comport with some of your
famous experiments around the sense of
being stared at right that's why I do
them yeah partly cuz I'm interested in
the feeling of being stared out in its
own right as an unexplained phenomenon
and if you were to pull nine people out
of 10 on the street they would probably
say you know that they've experienced
this anecdotally I think most people are
like yeah I could kind of tell somebody
was looking at me or something and it's
just this thing or like when you're
you're crossing a crosswalk you almost
look off the car like your awareness of
the car coming at you somehow will like
will block it and you can say that's
Superstition but I think everybody has
that sort of of instinct and maybe it's
actually an Adaptive Instinct and so
you're saying that the the your mind is
almost a transceiver and it's emitting
yes yeah that when when I project an
image of you to where you are um the my
mind has this image in it it's going the
opposite direction to the light and it's
somehow touching you it's overlapping
with you
now so what am I am I just a am I just a
product of holography of mind or well no
you're you're the the neuroscientist
annel Seth here in Britain calls it a
controlled hallucination that our
perceptions are controlled
hallucinations I'm perfectly happy with
that idea that because we can also have
images in our dreams when we're not
seeing things those are kind of
hallucinations but during perception
visual perception the images I'm
producing and projecting are normally
coinciding with what's there if they're
not then it's an illusion or
hallucination which also
occur but the easiest way to see how our
minds project is to think of what
happens when you look at something in a
mirror when you look at something in a
mirror what I'm suggesting in fact what
physics textbooks tell you as well is
that uh your light comes in is B say
here's the mirror the lights Bent by the
mirror comes into my eye but I project
out images that go along with the light
coming the eye but when It Gos to gets
to the mirror the mirror acts like a
kind of beam splitter and the virtual
image produced that I'm projecting out
go straight through it because it's
virtual not physical doesn't get bent by
the mirror so all my projections that
I'm normally projecting out that
coincide with what I'm seeing when you
look at things in the mirror and now
behind the mirror as virtual images and
that's the standard physics textbook
explanation of virtual images so oddly
enough although this theory of sending
images out from the eye is totally
heretical within science it's actually
taught in physics textbooks to every
school child to explain mirror images
because they can't explain it any other
way so what would be emitted from your
eyes in this case or that you'd have to
look for a candidate there well that's I
spend a lot of time thinking about this
yeah um because you know one way would
be to say that you have something's
emitted that's purely mental and it's
not really very closely coupled to the
light it just happens to go in the
opposite direction um another
possibility would be that there's a kind
of that light itself can flow in both
directions and there's a theory of
quantum entanglement not not quantum
entanglement quantum theory called the
transactional interpretation of quantum
mechanics yes due to John Kramer yeah
and develop handshake between the
present and the past that's right yeah
well and recently developed by Ruth
castner who's another quantum physicist
and what Kramer says is that when light
leaves say light leaves your T-shirt red
light leaves your T-shirt comes into my
eye absorbed by a cone cell in cone
cells in my eye at the very moment that
those pigments in the eye absorb that
Photon they send out a reverse as it
were
antiphoton uh that moves from the future
towards the past your when the one
coming from your T-shirt to my eye is
from the past towards the future it's
flowing in the normal Direction causal
Direction but at the very moment it hits
my it's emitted by your T-shirt my eye
emits as it were an anti Photon going
the opposite direction so the two form a
kind of standing wave linking that which
is seen
with that which is seeing it and so
there's an actual connection through the
light itself according to this
interpretation of quantum
mechanics now if I look at you from
behind and you don't know I'm there I'm
projecting my image onto your back and
the maybe the light rays are connecting
me with your back and if no one knows
how if you can somehow detect that um
then the sense of being stared out you
see ties in with vision it has to be
tied in with vision it happens in
response to vision and one of my most
recent papers on the sense of being
stared at which is scientifically called
scop athesia from scop as in microscope
seeing aesthesia feeling as in
anesthesia
synesthesia um my most recent paper on
the subject is called directional
scalesia and its implications for
theories of
and by examining almost a thousand case
histories of people responding to being
looked at both the people who've
responded and the people who've done the
looking I've got stories from both sides
uh it emerges that in real life this
happens almost always in a directional
manner so say you look at somebody from
an upstairs window I mean this is a
typical example in my case history
collection
looking at someone walking past and from
an upstairs window if they feel you're
being stared out they don't just they
don't think in fact they don't think at
all they just turn and look straight at
the person looking at them it's a
directional response and it works with
animals as well animals respond
directionally to human looks and humans
respond to animal
looks and so I think the sense of being
stared at is very deep in animal nature
it's to do with vision I think it
evolved originally in connection with
Predator prey relations because a prey
animal that could tell when a hidden
Predator was watching it would stand a
better chance of escaping than one that
couldn't tell so there'd be natural
selection in favor of this and so I
think this is very common um and I think
it does tell us something about the
nature of vision which is why I'm so
interested in it but nobody has a clue
why this is happening and if you look at
the number of people in the world
investigating scop athesia I think the
the total number is probably around
three at the moment I'm one of them um
and the it's there's virtually no
attention to it because it's completely
taboo because from the point of view of
regular science the mind's nothing but
the brain all your thoughts are inside
your head so if you look at someone from
behind um there's no way these thoughts
which are just electrical changes inside
your brain could influence them 100
yards away uh so therefore the official
scientific position is this doesn't
exist it's non-existent it's a
Superstition it's pseudo science it
can't possibly exist therefore it
doesn't um and therefore it's not a
valid topic for scientific investigation
it's especially provocative because
you're almost saying that the
measurement of an object is affecting
the past in some ways like your your
perception is uh you're sort of uh
flowing something back onto the object
and then your your perception of it is
uh somehow dependent on that that
backwards flow as well or there's maybe
kind of a retrocausal model uh or you
know causality goes both ways future
into present and past into present or
something yeah I think so so I think if
you look at a distant star that say four
light years away when you see the star I
think not only the light's coming to it
takes four light years to get to you but
on this transactional Theory you're
sending your visual
images from now to four years in the
past when the light was emitted from
that star and so it's actually moving
not only out across space but backwards
in
time and you see there are some people
who the philosopher Alfred North
Whitehead thought that the whole of
mental causation is retrocausal that our
minds work in the opposite direction
from the future towards the past whereas
regular physical causation works from
the past towards the future they overlap
in the present um and you see our minds
are concerned they're primarily cons
conscious minds are primarily concerned
with
possibility um all the possible things
you could do or say U our minds contents
of Consciousness are
possibilities this is extremely clear in
dreams where they're nothing but
possibilities um but normally they're
constrained by the sensory information
but it's all about possible
actions and so when you have a lot of
possible actions in your mind and then
you choose to do one of them as soon as
you do that does it like the collapse of
the wave function the collapse of these
possibilities something you actually do
and when you actually do it it becomes a
physical fact that can be measured but
possibly ities are not physical facts
they're possibilities they're real but
they're not physical and that's the real
the realm of Consciousness is that is
what's happening in Consciousness is
real but not physical because it's about
possibility and Consciousness is about
forming intentions and intentions are
things about that are going to happen in
the future and there's a sense in which
this virtual future acts back on the
past like both of has formed an
intention to be talking here right now M
and the and sure enough we're doing it
and it's an objective fact being
recorded on cameras and by microphones
and so by all the normal scientific
criteria is an objective physical fact
but before it happened uh we had this
date and time that existed only in the
future and our Direction our activities
were directed towards it I mean you came
here and you travel here and find your
way here on the Underground Railway and
that kind of thing um so you your
actions were directed towards a future
goal and in that sense the future goal
in your Consciousness worked back on
your past to draw you towards this point
now yeah and it's even been shown in
Quantum computations you can reverse
Cubit positions and there's temporal non
non-locality and like double slit
experiments where it seems like
measurement of something in the present
is affecting the past
and so I almost wonder if uh if there
are levels of mind or something if you
are literally experiencing shards of the
future at some point if if if the future
can't actually send semantic information
back in
time well I think it can I don't think
it does it all the time but it it I mean
pre synchronicities you know like is
that sort of well synchronous is by
definition the things that happen at the
same time but I think what you're
talking the sort of like a like a Deja
Vu exper you know yes well that I think
would be more it's as if you've known
the thing in the future and then you're
re experiencing it in the present well
where that shows up most is in
precognitive
dreams and lots of people have
precognitive dreams you dream of
something a day or two it's usually only
a few days before it happens um but
precognitive dreams are are much more
common than most people think partly
because we forget most our dreams and as
soon as you start writing your dreams
down and remembering
them then I've done it myself you start
noticing precognitive aspects to these
dreams um it's happening all the
time sometimes more spectacular than
others when the 9/11 World Trade Center
disaster occurred in New York it
occurred to me that this would be a
fantastic research opportunity so with
within 3 days I had posters up in
Washington Square um and I ran a series
of ads in the Village Voice um asking
did you dream of the World Trade Center
and I have a collection of more than 75
dreams that people sent me wow um of the
they fell into three main categories one
were of dreams that people were on
planes that were flying into skyscrapers
really scary dreams of not necessarily
the World Trade Center some were the
empire State Building some of the Sear's
Tower you know they weren't necessarily
in New York but they were flying into
Towers the second category were people
trapped in blazing buildings you know
the Panic of being trapped in a in a SI
scraper that's on fire and the third
category were walking down city streets
with an eerie sense of Doom in vast
clouds of dust rolling down the street
all of these things of course happened
and all of them were widely seen on TV
um so I think what people were actually
dreaming in advance was the dreaming of
their actual own experience of seeing
these images on TV or of hearing about
the disaster after it like a Prem memory
a pre-memory yeah and some people who do
research in this area in psychic
research suggest that things like this
could be called preall yeah as opposed
to recall yeah yeah there's a there was
a story of a resident artist in uh one
of the towers actually because they they
had some Artistry program and he did a
rendition of a him as a tusy Airman with
like old you know XP 40 fighter jets all
flying into him and this was 12 days
before 9911 I have to look up his name
but it's it's just wild like you can't
attribute that to chance I think it's
this yes it's this kind of thing and
then there were some people who just
didn't go into work that day because
they had premonition a weird feeling
there was a whole article about it in
the Washington Post I mean this is this
wasn't just some obscure psychic
researcher there was an article called
lucky to be alive in the Washington Post
that actually told the stories of people
who hadn't gone to work that day for a
variety of reasons so strange you know
there's a there's a book I think in the
early 20th century 10ish years before
the Titanic and it describes this big
ship called the Titan and it has all
these sort of blue blooded elites on
board and it you know hits an iceberg
and goes down and it's like a literal
description of the Titanic and that
seems to be way more common I think and
the more you notice it I think the that
that begets noticing it even more or
something so I think there's no doubt
that precognitive dreams happen um and
you know they've been known throughout
all history and and um
so you know research on precognitive
dreams has been done mainly by psychical
researchers but the problem we have in
all these areas is that the because of
this dominant scientific Orthodoxy of
mechanistic materialism none of these
things should happen according to that
model therefore they don't happen
according to standard Defenders of
mechanistic Orthodoxy and they have all
these skeptic organizations you know
they're actual skeptic organization
like the committee for skeptical inquiry
Publishers of the skeptical Inquirer I
just debated um Michael Shermer who I
know you've debated before and it's just
it's bad basian reasoning because you
just have this bucket of like impossible
and you place all these things like all
your experiments you just place it in
the bucket of impossible and then your
prior knowledge is is going to be
lacking it's going to be bad you're just
not it's a prior disinterest I know it's
basically it's defending a world view by
rejecting things that don't fit in
explaining them away yes and long long
ago Thomas the philosopher of
science the historian of Science in his
theory of paradigms and Paradigm shifts
pointed out that at any given stage of
science you have an established
Orthodoxy which is taught in the schools
and universities which is what frames
accepted practice but there's always
anomalies things that don't fit in and
the response of the Orthodox to the
anomalies is to ignore them or deny them
or explain them away um and psychic
phenomena are exactly that in the
present mechanistic materialist
Orthodoxy yes and the result is that the
number of people who do research in
these areas is very very small and none
of them receive any official funding you
know from Government funding and
National Science Foundation that kind of
thing yeah and and then people complain
about the lack of progress and you do
like a comparison of funding from like
you know it's like the large hron
colliders like $5 billion or something
they just all of
parascaris the biggest funding Agency
for
parapsychology is the BL foundation in
Portugal portug
B um and about half their grants go to
parapsychology so I think it's probably
in the order of about a million dollars
a year yeah right and that's the biggest
funding agency you know and National
Institutes of Health is what $35 billion
a year and it's just it's this bizarre
phenomena where a lot of elite
universities in the US had
parasyuk with the Ryan Center or
Princeton Paras lab or SRI at Stanford
and almost all the people involved in
the programs came out of these you know
researching random event generators or
remote viewing or whatever saying there
is something here like none of none of
the people who were involved came out or
very few of them came out being like you
know what I found nothing and so was
this bizarre thing where we just we just
decided to sort of wholesale discount
all this stuff and there are issues with
parapsychology and at least in its
present state in that I think it's hard
to instrumentalize and scale up I think
it's more bound up with uh person's
moral development and character
progression or kind of internal
coherence than we'd like to admit or
something so it's like I have a mentor
named John Valentino who helped run the
Princeton parapsychology lab pair under
Bob John and I think he would say that
you know so you have a random event
generator you take this binary computer
it produces ones and zeros on a
graphical interface but it's tied to
something that we think of as random in
quantum mechanics so like radioactive
isotope Decay or Quantum tunneling and
you have the Observer and the Observer
is able to skew it towards ones and
zeros it's supposed to be this perfect
coin flip that doesn't make any sense
sense but what John would say is that
your sort of internal alignment or
coherence which sounds kind of woowoo is
actually affects your sort of zcore or
you know the statistical distribution
that you would get as a result and I
think that just
breaks too many priors for uh you know
conventional materialist reductionists
because all of a sudden they're saying
you know the state of the Observer is
important for what is observed and
that's kind of comports with the model
you just mentioned of the mind being a
transceiver and you imposing in actual
kind of elements of the image that
you're seeing onto the thing itself but
I think it's just too much for science
to look
at well I think you know there are a lot
of individual scientists who are very
interest in these things and you know
because I I've talked about them openly
for a long time whenever I visit
scientific institutes I always have the
experience of people coming up to me
when no one else is listening you know
the the drinks reception or the tea or
tea reception they look both ways and
they say you know I'm really interested
in your work I've had these experiences
you know you know these telephone
telepathy or I've been interested in
morphic resonance and St and then they
say but I can't talk about it here
because everyone's so straight and then
a few minutes later another one comes up
and says almost the same things and you
know by the time four or five time I
said well actually you're not alone you
know there are several people in your
own Department who think like this and
they said oh no there aren't I said oh
yes there AR they said how do you know
and I said because they've just told me
him and her and him and so the thing is
that within actual institutional science
most scientists are in the closet about
their own personal views they're
frightened of this culture of dogmatic
materialism and um and won't apply for
Grants or do research in this area well
partly because there aren't any grants
or hardly any and partly because it
would endanger their career to do
research in these areas but they don't
even talk about it usually with
colleagues unless they know them very
well and trust them because they're
afraid of being thought weird but if you
take the actual opinions of actual
scientists it's not the case that the
99% of pro uh materialist skeptical
denial position about these things the
majority are open-minded and in fact the
majority have had these experiences
themselves I agree they just have to
tiptoe around it they're kind of
epistemically constrained at the start
and it's this sort of publish or Parish
they're they're they are addicted to
sort of prestige and they're sort of
always Prestige hounding I mean a good
example I've noticed and I don't want to
bash him too much but it's like the on
the UFO World which I'm really
interested in the UFO alien thing which
is very in the Zeitgeist right now and
um you know there's this professor and
we' had some early conversations you
know four or five years ago and you know
I I've been interested in this kind of
time travel hypothesis or or some the
idea that uh you know what we're seeing
and I want to get into this because I
know you wrote a book called the physics
of angels which might touch on this a
little bit but the idea of what we're
seeing is more of an emanation
from man uh versus some you know little
green man from Zeta
reticuli and anyways I'm I'm with him at
some conference where like by the bar
and I'm like I'm like if you actually
use inductive logic these things are not
from other planets and he like looks at
me and he sort of like Whispers and he's
like you're right like he's like I agree
with you but he like can't say it
publicly or something because like the
alien thing is popular and he needs to
get funding or whatever and it's just
lame like I I would just be so bearish
Academia on a go forward basis and
bullish uh people like yourself uh
especially if we can get more patronage
out there for you know serious work in
in what are considered Fringe areas
because you you have to tiptoe around
and dance around you can't you have to
posture constantly you can't engage in
Earnest real
thinking yes it's a shame in certain
areas of of Academia that's definitely
true I'm I'm curious to hear more about
your recent paper on the Sun as
conscious I wrote this paper called is
the sun conscious which is published in
the Journal of Consciousness studies
which is a fairly mainstream journal to
do with the nature of consciousness
um the reason I'm interested in it is
partly because in many traditional
societies it's always assumed that the
sun is conscious so and you know the
Japanese think the sun is a goddess the
Greeks thought the sun was a God and but
in our disenchanted modern world viw you
know it's just a physical object obeying
mathematical laws nuclear fusion reactor
yes so uh I was interested in this
conflict between the older views which
was also in medieval Europe um it was
generally taken for granted that the
stun and the other stars were conscious
beings and Plato thought the sun and the
planets were what he called visible gods
and we still call the planets by the
names of gods and goddesses like Venus
and Mars and
Mercury
um the context for writing this paper
was the upsurge in academic philos phos
ophy of pans psychism the idea there's
Consciousness throughout nature that
Consciousness is not just confined to
human
brains um and the reason that pans
psychism has become influential within
academic philosophy in the last 20 years
or so is because of the hard problem of
explaining human consciousness or animal
Consciousness as
well and why it's a hard problem is that
the prevailing world world view within
institutional science is mechanistic
materialism the idea the whole universe
is made of unconscious matter that
behaves mechanically in accordance with
mathematical laws there's no God out
there no Spirits No Angels all that's
make believe and it's just ideas in
human minds and therefore electrical or
chemical patterns in human brains
there's nothing out there um that's the
standard View
the whole universe is made of
unconscious matter so then the problem
arises well how come we're conscious if
everything's meant to be unconscious
matter and our brains are made of matter
why does matter become conscious in our
brains and possibly in the brains of a
wide range of other animals but
nevertheless confined to brains with the
whole of the rest of the universe
utterly unconscious except perhaps for
Little Green Men or um
sort of Science Fiction type beings on
other planets um
so the the within the philosophy of Mind
people have made entire careers out of
professors in universities U of trying
to prove that we're not conscious so we
ought not to be conscious because if
everything's unconscious we ought to be
unconscious too so some professors
believe it or not have actually made a
career out of saying that we're not
really conscious at all Sam Harris it's
it's like all
existence is an illusion you have no
self or something well yes well then
some of them some of them are
straightforward denialists some of them
say Consciousness is a meaningless epip
phenomenon like the kind of shadow of
the activity of the brain but it doesn't
do anything to which the problem then
arises well why is it evolved in that
case if it doesn't do anything um they
don't have an answer for that and then
the perhaps one of the more common
positions is that Consciousness is
illusion produced by the physical
activity of the brain but that doesn't
work either because illusion is itself a
mode of Consciousness so you can't
explain Consciousness as an illusion
because illusion presupposes
Consciousness so that's why it's called
the hard problem all these attempts to
solve it um in terms of this framework
of mechanistic materialism have failed
and philosophers just go round and round
and round in circles I mean it lasts a
whole lifetime of
academic you know career this kind of
thing and there's this problem of the
eye seeing the eye it's sort of the
Chomsky Mind Body problem or something
where fundamentally the aperture through
which you understand or see anything is
the Mind itself so how do how does one
understand its own well exactly I mean
you need to be conscious in order to do
physics or science I mean it's the whole
thing is a product of Consciousness it
presupposes Consciousness right so you
can't really get rid of Consciousness
without getting rid of Science and the
whole of human culture as well as all
our own subjective lives as well and
it's so interesting to read some of the
early like Quantum field theorists who
are now totally misattributed as being
kind of you know hardcore material
materialist reductionists and they all
say the same thing you know it's all
it's all filtered through the mind all
of them flirted with the mind being the
you know collapser of the way function
at at points in their career um but
going back to your paper on the sun well
yes well I I just to finish that bit
about the hard problem yeah you see one
group of
philosophers the pan psychist have
revived an ancient idea that was
Consciousness throughout nature pan
means everywhere um
so what they saying is Well if there's a
tiny little bit of Consciousness in
electrons a little bit more in atoms bit
more in molecules and bit more in cells
and tissues and organs and things then
when you get to a complex structure like
the brain then it's a difference of
degree not of kind so they think they
can solve the hard Problem by saying
well Consciousness is actually in all
these lower systems lower level systems
that add in the brain allow this higher
level of Consciousness to emerge so
that's their motive and they've
persuaded a lot of people that that's
the case and pan psychism is now taught
in a lot of mainstream universities
whereas you know when I was at
University the idea of nature being
alive was called animism and it was just
rejected as a sort of primitive
Superstition or a kind of childish thing
that people grow out of by the age of 10
or 11 um so um but now it's you know
taken seriously but what these
philosophers do is when they get to the
brain which they aim is to explain human
consciousness they stop and so I thought
well what happens if we carry on what
happens if we look at the sun because
given the background that lots of people
have always thought sun is a conscious
being of some
kind what would it look like to take pan
psychism seriously and apply it to the
Sun that was the purpose of my paper um
and so in it I look at one or two well
several different aspects of this
question one is what would be the
interface between the sun's
Consciousness and its body its physical
body the Sun that we actually observe
and I think the answer there would be
the electromagnetic field because the
interface between our minds and our
bodies most people would agree is the
electromagnetic activity of the brain
you know different kinds of alpha waves
theta waves beta waves gamma waves Etc
different kinds of brain waves which are
electrical waves of activity in the
brain measured by electrodes on the
skull so they they're affecting the
electromagnetic field um these are
correlated with Consciousness and most
people would feel they have something to
do with it um so if the interface we
don't know how it works but if the
interface of Consciousness in our own
brains with the physical activity of the
brain is through the electromagnetic
field then the sun has vastly more
complex electromagnetic fields that
stretch out through the whole solar
system which is its body who know where
in the solar wind the magnetosphere of
the Earth Earth it's like an envelope
around the earth and when there's a
solar flare or a coronal mass ejection
huge amounts of ionized electrically
charged particles are spat out from the
Sun and if they hit the earth as they
did recently um then you get spectacular
Northern Lights the northern lights were
seen as far south as London right here
actually I didn't see them myself cuz it
was cloudy but in where people were in
less cloudy places in Southern England
it's very unusual see the Northern
Lights which are caused by electrical
discharges from the Sun getting into the
ionosphere and then coming down to the
Earth as sheets of plasma and charged
particles so the if the sun's um
conscious then the electromagnetic field
of the sun provides a very good
interface for it and then the next
question well well if it's conscious
then what does it think about uh you
know what does it do with its cons
Consciousness there's no point in having
in mind if it doesn't do something and
what decisions could it make what
choices could it make how could its mind
influence its
actions and there one possibility would
be uh affecting the direction in which
solar flares or coronal mass ejections
take place it has this this 11e cycle of
activity um and in the middle of that
cycle there's lot of sunspots and solar
flares and things
so the direction in which they shoot out
um would have big effects if they're
shot out directly aimed at the Earth
they could take out our power system
Carrington event of
1859 so are you familiar with the solar
storm of 1859 Carrington took out it
would have taken out now the entire grid
but it took out electrical lines and
there was you know big outage as a
result of it and we're we're seeing as
you mentioned an upsurge of activity
right now with the magnetosphere of the
Earth weakening absolutely well the the
so the sun can affect life on Earth
through directing its flares and if it
chooses which direction to shoot them in
then that would be one thing it could be
thinking about modulating the activity
of the whole solar system through its
its own activity which immediately
influences the entire
heliosphere there's around the entire
solar system there's a kind of membrane
electromagnetic membrane called the
heliopause
and the whole of the solar system is
within an arm of the Galaxy where
there's uh streams of particles and
electric currents called the galactic
wind similar to the solar wind so
there's a kind of membrane where within
the galactic wind and that's really the
kind of body of the sun the sun itself
would be like the brain or the heart of
the whole solar system the entire thing
is filled with this electromagnetic
field and the sun would be able to sense
what's happening in the whole solar
system through changes in the
electromagnetic field we're now within
the electromagnetic field of the sun
through the daylight everything that
happens on Earth is within the solar
magnetic electromagnetic
field um
so then you see if one goes on thinking
about the sun's Consciousness then what
about other stars well why not and if
stars are conscious why not the whole
galaxy I the stars and solar systems are
like cells in the body of the Galaxy
that might have a kind of Galactic mind
and then galaxies are grouped together
in clusters of galaxies and those are
linked up through the entire Cosmos by
something called The Cosmic web which
were threads of plasma through which
huge electric currents and magnetic
field lines millions of light years long
uh link everything together and when you
look at the big picture it looks very
like a neural network joining up all
these galaxies so there could be a kind
of cosmic mind uh the whole universe
might be conscious um and it might have
this interface with electromagnetic
phenomena uh throughout the entire
universe that's fascinating are you
familiar with the work of Dr Michael
Levan at tus by any chance yeah I know
Michael Levan so his stuff fascinates me
because he shows just how important the
electromagnetic field is as far as
dictating human and animal morphology
yes and so I find it interesting you
know maybe maybe the SCH res of the
earth is actually essential for uh
bodies to grow in in proper ways in fact
if you put a frog embryo in a faraday
cage it won't grow normally if you put
it next to a Wi-Fi router it also won't
grow normally so there's something it's
kind of like a point towards the
anthropic principle around the
magnetosphere of the earth and then I
think about what causes mutations one of
the you know the main culprits there and
even In Darwin's model it's got to be U
UV radiation from the Sun itself so
there's something about the
magnetosphere of the earth and the
interaction with solar radiation that is
essential to creating these sort of
fine-tuned conditions around life and it
just feels like the super underexplored
now you're exploring it
area well I mean all this of course is
speculative uh but it's also speculative
that the sun's unconscious I mean no has
ever proved that it's just been assumed
um so I it's to my mind is an open
question and I think that nature becomes
much more interesting the whole of
nature when we take a pan psychist view
is it speculative though it's it it's
it's not speculative that the sun is
acting in this sort of seemingly perfect
way to create if you think about it like
again if you take the the Faraday
chamber example and then the Wi-Fi
router example there is something about
that interaction between UV radiation
magnetosphere of the earth that creates
the evolution that we've seen today
of animals and humans and we know that
there is an effect between
electromagnetism and because of you know
Mike L and Gary Becker before him and so
is it you know there there's some sort
of finely tuned thing we don't know that
there's some Creator behind it or
Consciousness behind it there's still
the hard problem but I don't think it's
that heretical to say that that is you
know it's creating this perfect
condition well no that's one thing but
the question of why these conditions are
so good I mean that's another question
the the the the materialists would say
it's just chance or there's billions of
planets in the universe we just happen
to be on the one that's right for us
sort of thing so I don't think that
would convince anyone particularly but
um I think that moving away from the
idea that Consciousness has to be
located in brains what I call the
Centric view of Consciousness uh would
is is quite helpful um and then of
course this is isn't saying that
everything in nature is superconscious
all the time most of our own mind is
unconscious all our habits are
unconscious and as Freud and Yung and
many others showed a lot of mental
activity is unconscious so I would
expect that other Minds in nature
including the solar mind are largely
habitual and largely unconscious just
like our own I think that's a perfect
segue into morphic fields which I think
most people probably know you for uh
which are these sort of a collective
memory or mechanisms of inheritance that
are orthogonal or lie outside of the
traditional kind of materialist
reductionist darwinian model uh do do
you want to describe what they are and
maybe maybe one seminal
experiment there are two parts of my
hypothesis really morphic fields and
morphic
resonance the idea of morphic fields is
that all self-organizing systems um are
organized by a field Which shapes their
form and organization the word morphic
means form in
Greek um so they're fields of
form
and that at every level of organization
the whole is more than the sum of the
parts so the morphic field of an atom
which is pretty well what Quantum field
Theory describes is the are those fields
of the Proto of the the nuclear part
particles the nucleus itself and all the
electrons around it that together makes
up a vibratory pattern of activity which
is everyone agrees underlain by fields
in this case called Quantum fields or
Quantum matter
Fields then the field of a molecule
includes the fields of the atoms but
links them together through chemical
bonds or clouds of electrons going all
around wizzing around the outside like a
kind of membrane of an organic
molecule and then in
you have the membrane you've got all the
structures within them
all the molecules um held together in a
lot higher hole within tissues and
organs and organisms and then societies
of organisms like flocks of birds or
termite colonies at each level the whole
is more than the sum of the parts and
organizes the parts to form a coherent
hole that's what I think morphic Fields
do I think they're what give the Hess
that which is more than the sum of the
parts but such Fields could not be
inherited by DNA or genes because DNA
and genes code for the sequence of amino
acids and proteins which is very
different from organizing the structure
of a termite Colony or the shape of the
wing of a bird or the form or the
instincts of a giraffe um these things
are not just protein molecules they're
much more complex pattern of
organization so they can't be inherited
through genes so how are they inherited
because they obviously are I mean
animals of a given species form the
right kinds of bodies over and over
again and have the right kinds of
instincts over and over again um so this
is the second part of my proposal that
this happens through a kind of memory U
across time directly connecting similar
systems through the process that I call
morphic resonance
[Music]
and resonance is analogous to acoustic
resonance where if you make so you put
the sustaining pedal on a piano for
example you go ooh into the piano it'll
resonate back ooh if you go e you go e
what's happening is the strings in the
piano are resonating with the tone
you're making and the overtones which
are different for the different vows
making those strings all vibrate and
that gives off the sound and that's
acoustic
resonance and radio and television and
cell phones all work on R resonance too
when you tune in a radio set to a
particular frequency the areial of the
radio sets resonating with the frequency
at which the transmission's happening
which is why each transmission has its
own frequency um so that's a wellknown
form of resonance it happens across this
space and um this room is full of r
radio and cell phone and television U
Transmissions we can't see them what
would you say is the seminal I mean
they're various seminal experiments you
know around rats and Riverbanks and you
know other other sorts of scenarios but
do do you have a sort of a favorite one
when it comes to kind of speaking about
this to a mass audience well I think the
the simplest example of morphe resonance
the easiest to understand is the rat ex
example that if you train rats to learn
a new trick in London then rats in New
York and San Francisco and Melbourne
Australia and Beijing should all be able
to learn the same trick quicker just
because the rats have learned it here um
and that should happen without any
normal means of communication would
happened by morphic resonance they
confronted by a similar problem the rats
are similar they should be able to do it
quicker now there's actual evidence from
a long series of experience with rats
that that actually happens
um also if you make a new chemical
compound for the first time and you
crystallize it that Crystal form won
have existed before because it's a new
compound and the more often you
crystallize it the easier it should get
for crystals of that kind to form and in
fact that's amazing well it is actually
really well known to chemists that new
compounds are very difficult to
crystalize you maybe wait years before
you get the first Crystal but thereafter
it gets easier to C
world that's insane that's crazy I think
about sometimes athletic accomplishments
too where somebody pushes the bar just a
little bit farther and then all of a
sudden it just seems easier or something
ostensibly and like you could attribute
that to like modern doping or something
but I think it's something more than
that it's almost as if an accomplishment
that formerly was thought to be
impossible is uploaded to a central
monad or repository or something and
then if somebody calls upon it with the
right resonance in the future you know
they it's it's it's that much easier
because you have more more data in the
repository or some something like that
yeah I mean that could be I mean that's
one possible explanation I mean the
thing is that whenever I put forward
ideas about morphic resonance I'm
assailed by crowds of Skeptics yeah
rightly so I mean it's important in
science to have skepticism with
Athletics one of the Skeptics arguments
is well you know tapping into a huge
much expanded pool of contestants yeah
and and you know before any a few sort
of middle class English people and a few
Rich Americans could take part in
Olympic Games and now you've got people
from all over the world millions
billions of people who potentially could
compete so the ends of the normal
distribution curve go out further as it
were can I tell you why I think it's not
accepted because you can't turn it into
math and people only it's we're math
reductionists and it breaks the existing
Paradigm and so we and we don't have a
good theory as to the causal mechanism
so it's like we were talking about black
body radiation in the 1860s or something
people would be like that's impossible
you know like how does that work it
doesn't make sense and then you you sort
of need the quantum Revolution to
explain that or something and so yeah
can can you turn it into can you turn it
into an equation well but I don't know
the thing is right now one has to say
that almost everything in biology can't
be turned into math and almost
everything in Psychology can't be
there's no one who could write an
equation for your mind um or for your
thinking processes right now I mean
there's there's no mathematical equation
for that and there's no mathematical
equation for the most simple things
about plants and animals if you're
classifying plants you look at the plant
you look at the form with the leaves and
the flowers and if you want to know
which species it is you consult an
expert and if they're not sure they go
to Q Gardens to the herbarium look up a
pressed specimen and compare it and the
ultimate reference is a pressed specimen
of a plant not very mathematical I'm on
I'm on your side but I'm going to play
devil's advocate here because I think
you know we need to get stronger which
is like you know if you're um a radio or
you're a TV or something it's like
clearly it's like a it's a radio
frequency signal and so that resonance
is the causal mechanism is clear and you
can manipulate it you can reduce it and
so I'm sympathetic to certain things
being irreducible Allah mind and biology
which I think is very Tethered to the
mind but you know is there is there
something in you know some version of
electromagnetism or something that we
can actually point to as you know the
conduit for information transfer here no
I would say that morphic resonance is
itself a fundamental principle of nature
you know like gravity is and actually no
one really understands gravity you know
we all take it for granted we're not
floating around in this room now because
we're held down by gravity it's
invisible force permeates all the space
around us but does it depend on waves or
particles you know some people say yes
and they say occasionally we've got some
evidence for gravitational waves
Etc but if you ask us simple question
like what's the speed of gravity um it
turns out no one knows the usual
assumption is the speed of light but it
takes 8 minutes from the light for for
the Sun's light to get to the Earth and
if you're calculating where to send
probes and Rockets yeah um and you
assume the sun's where it was 8 minutes
ago or at
least the gravity is coming from it's
taking 8 minutes to get here all the
calculations don't work they only work
if you assume that is
instantaneous and so some people there's
a physicist called van flandern um
argues that the speed of gravity is at
least two billion times the speed of
light um but in practice physicists
assume it's
instantaneous that's the only way their
their calculations work so there's so
much we don't know but I would say that
morphic resonance is well you can
quantify the effects if you're doing a
rat experiment and you train a thousand
rats does more effect than if you train
10 rats and you can do graphs that show
its relationship to quantity uh
intensity of effect so it's not if it's
not quantitative it's quantitatively
measurable through these
experiments and you can make models of
morph morphic Fields um the French
mathematician Renee Tom made
mathematical models which were in in a
branch of mathematics called
topology and differential topology um
now most mathematicians don't understand
differential topology it's a specialized
Branch but it's about the shape of
things and he thought that these fields
contain attractors which attract the
developing system towards a goal and in
fact you can make models and theoretical
biologists do make models of how
developing organ biological systems are
attracted towards morix
attractors um so there there are
actually mathematical models um
so the thing is about mathematical
models that I people write to me with
mathematical models of morphic resonance
um but I'm not a mathematician and so
you know when I see several pages of
equations about their theory of how
morphic resonance might work I sort of
glaze over because I can't I can't
understand it yeah um you know and if
somebody said to me you know where's a
mathematical model of morphe resonance I
could forward them some of these things
say okay here's one I don't know if it's
right or wrong because I can't
understand it myself but if you want
pages of equations here they are most
people don't really want to see pages of
equations because they don't understand
them they just want a rhetorical Ploy
yes for ignoring that's right or they
want they want you to just assure them
that they can be made into math but they
don't want to look at the actual math
wants to look at the mass but as I say
there's most things in in biology can't
be reduced to mass I mean you can say
flowers have three four or five petals
and there's a Fibonacci series in
sunflower heads but once you said a few
things like that um Mass isn't much help
anymore is there something about biology
that is exceptionally Tethered to
Consciousness in a way that inanimate
matter is not so like I love uh Irwin
Schrodinger's what is life you know that
lectures where he talks about biology as
being again very coupled with with the
mind and mental processes I mean we use
Placebo like it's this dirty word right
like it's like oh they they took a sugar
pill and it was just as effective as you
know some other experimental protocol
but uh it's just Placebo as if that's
not this like miraculous you know insane
sort of thing um yeah do do you think
there's a a a tie there between
Consciousness and
biology well I think mind-like
activities um underly or biology I mean
morphic fields are mind like they have
habits they have forms shapes structures
patterns of
organization and I think mostly they're
working at the habitual level and we're
not conscious of our inhabits so I think
they're basically habitual but they're
mind-like and but I think something
similar would be well I think is i' I've
already said of of non-biological
systems like the sun and the Galaxy and
even molecules and crystals you see you
have a ordering principle a structure a
form and you can't predict that from
basic quantum physics I mean if you
start with the shredding equation of
quantum physics the whole thing Peters
up by the time you get to the helium
atom yeah um so you know it's not as if
this is giving as precise predictions of
complex protein molecules so that brings
up a really important question which is
if we're all part of Greater morphic
Fields like on a macroscopic level is
there is it not really important to
choose which morphic Fields you interact
with so that you are you know uh
engaging in the right goals like is that
not somehow really essential to the life
you're you're
leading well this to to answer that we
have to step back a little bit um
that I think that our habits are
influenced by morphic resonance from
lots of people in the past and I think
that this morphic resonance or
Collective memory a bit like what Yung
called the collective
unconscious I think that these are
shaped by many people in the past and
they facilitate learning things so when
a baby learns to speak and language I
think a lot of that's happening by
morphic
resonance the um linguist know Chomsky
talked about an
innate language ability innate grammar
um because he was fascinated by the way
that young children learn to speak and
it's not genetic you see you can take a
Chinese baby and be adopted by a
European family and learn to speak
English or French and vice versa and
there's big difference between the
genetic backgrounds so it's not if it's
hardwired in the genes um
yet it is inherited in some way and I
think that's happening by morphic
resonance you see I think it's a kind of
resonance as you learn something and
when you learn something lots of people
have learned before like swimming or
riding a bicycle I think this is
facilitated by morphic
resonance so when it comes to the
cultural forms we adopt then every
cultural form every Behavior pattern
that's been shared by lots of people
would have a kind of morph field and
what we tunee into uh we if well if we
take up a hobby say like building model
airlanes then you'd sort of tune into
the field of model airlane Builders and
you'd learn how to sort of glue the
balls of wood together and stuff more
quickly than you might otherwise have
done I think you mentioned Darwin even
touching on something that was like
morphic field like phenomena in The
Descent of man is that right where he's
talking I think about like dogs
inheriting the traits of their parents
um that's outside of just you know pure
he didn't have DNA at the time but this
pure kind of material model well darn
was very interested in the inheritance
of acquired characters you know that The
Offspring could inherit adaptations or
behavior from their parents sometimes
called lamaran inheritance but Darwin
was a lamaran um Neo darwinian Like
Richard Dawkins reject that aspect of D
Darwin but since the beginning of the
21st century um lamaran inheritance is
really back in fashion having been
rebranded epigenetic
inheritance yes so um I think that a lot
of epigenetic inherence is in fact a
result of morphic resonance and it's
usually assumed it's all a matter of
molecular changes in methylation of the
DNA or changes in histone
or small RNA molecules or something so
the fact that people can propose some
molecular basis has given people
permission to accept that it's real but
it's not proven that that's how it
actually works in most cases um the
question is open um so I I think that
the U well the case that Darwin was
reported in a paper in nature was a dog
that belonged to someone he knew
that got very frightened whenever it
went past a butcher's shop and it turned
out his father had done the same and so
Darwin speculated that this Behavior may
have been because the grandfather had
been maltreated by a butcher and a fear
of butcher had been
inherited um by these
dogs but you see he couldn't that was
just telling the story I mean Darwin
like me was interested in what people
actually observed he didn't just say
this is mere anecdote it has no
relevance or is of no interest he
thought this was a a data point that was
worth taking
seriously and now um Recent research in
epigenetics with mouse behavior has
shown something very similar in
laboratory experiments I don't know if
you've followed the mouse fear
experiments no well when they were
published in in nature there was that
the title was inheriting the fear of
fathers and in these experiments the
researchers um this was at some
University in the US I forgotten which
one I mean this is quite well-known
mainstream research um they took male
mice and they made them frightened of a
smell called
acetophenone smells a bit like cherries
it's a synthetic chemical um so they
exposed the mice to the smell and they
gave them a mild electric shock through
their pores and this is kind of
classical aversive conditioning type
thing so after a few times when the mice
smelt acetophenone they were petrified
and when mice have frighten frightened
they simply freeze you can measure the
freeze response so they trained these
mice to be terrified of
acetophenone then they bred from them
with mothers who'd never been exposed to
aceto phone um and then tested the
children and the grandchildren and they
were terrified of acet for known in a
single generation a fear of a particular
chemical been inherited um by these uh
mice uh in a way that couldn't possibly
be explained by cultural transmission
was a form of epigenetic or inherence or
perhaps morphic resonance that's
fascinating it's so funny it is very
invogue to say I'm healing my ancestral
trauma and everybody is talking about
DNA methylation and epigenetics and you
were talking about morphic resonance and
morphic far before like organ donor
recipients uh inheriting some of the
attributes of the donor like in certain
cases you suddenly know French or you
know how to drum or like you you pick up
the skill from the person that's giving
you the organ yes I mean the best
documented of the heart transplant cases
um well you see what people usually say
there is well the memories must have
been stored inside the heart you know in
the cells a cellular memory or something
that's got transferred
what I think because I don't think
memories are stored in cells I think
they work by morphic resonance when
someone's had a heart transplant that
heart continues to resonate with the
donor and including characteristics of
the donor's behavior and appetites and
likes and dislikes and so on and um
these are fascinating cases where the
recipient takes up characteristics of
the donor and they without knowing
anything about the donor and so there's
a transfer of memory with the heart but
I don't think it's in the heart um
there's a somewhat similar experiment of
Michael Levens with flat worms and
learning I don't know if you're familiar
with that experiment no what's the
experiment well I'm a big fan of Michael
Levin I and I think he's you know the
most inventive biologist working I agree
present yeah um and the he did these
experiments with flat worms which are
small worms which are flat that's why
they're called Flat worms they have a
head with sort of a region with little
eyes and a tail region and they don't
have much of a brain but they do have a
sort of cerebral ganglion in the head he
trained these flat worms to respond to
particular stimuli that he could measure
their response they learned the effect
then he cut their heads off and flat
worms regenerate very easily
um and the flat worms regenerated new
heads and when he tested the flat worms
they could still remember what they had
learned before wild so um you see one
possibility would be that the memory had
been stored all over the body in in the
cells of the flat worm that' be the
conventional explanation of Levin's
experiments my explanation would be that
it was morphic resonance with the
previous form of the intact form of the
flat worm they resonating with
themselves in the past um now the
experiments don't enable you to decide
between those two interpretations and
most people would go with the cellular
memory
interpretation point is about Michael
Levan he's really pushing the boundaries
of biology but he remains fairly
non-committal about exactly how this is
happening I know he's very intrigued by
the possibility of there being more to
biology than just physics and chemistry
and standard science
but he walks a tight rope between
pushing the boundary and going too far
if he went too far I mean most people
would say I go too far the result of
going too far is then you you're no
longer employed as a prestigous
professor in in a top university and
that sort of thing it it does affect
your career that's my sense of him is I
look at the books he reads and it seems
like he's pretty sympathetic to a lot of
this sort of Consciousness being
approach layer in biology and
parasyte with some monks out there and I
get this sense that he's far more
heretical in his private beliefs than
what meets the eye he has to kind of
walk walk the tight RPP but um are you
familiar with a a scientist at actually
University of Sur named um John Joe
mcfaden yes yes I knew him yes cuz that
that would be one example of kind of a
non-local the Theory Of Consciousness
you know but in this case it would be
electromagnetism would be the kind of
conduit for information transfer but
would what would you say about that
theory well that's relevant to what we
were talking about earlier in the
consciousness of the sun yeah because
joh Joe mcfaden not only argues that the
conscious activity of our brains is is
linked to the electromagnetic field he
argues that it is the electromagnetic
field the electromagnetic field see from
within as it were is
conscious um and on the mcfaden
principle then you could say that the
electromagnetic field of the sun is the
consciousness of the sun it when it's
experienced from within um I myself
don't think that electromagnetic fields
are themselves conscious I think they
interface with Consciousness I think
they're the bridge or the interface
between morphic Fields uh which uh the
fields of the Mind as it were that
interact with the electromagnetic fields
so when it comes to these psychic
phenomena for example the sense of being
stared at which we just talked about um
I'm just releasing an app at the moment
which works on cell phones uh where you
can train yourself to get better at it
and now I know it's possible to train
yourself because in the martial arts
there are various martial arts programs
where they train people to know when
they're being looked at from behind cuz
it's useful for self-defense you know if
someone's sneaking up from behind
planning to attack you if you can feel
them coming you'll survive and if you
can't you won't so it's worth training
and so they already have training
programs but this app works on cell
phones so anyone can try training
themselves to get better at it how do it
worked how does the app work yeah um
it's just a very simple test so if I
were doing it with you we'd both have
our cell phones T tuned in there would
be a QR code on mine you'd take the
thing on yours so they linked up
together then mine in a random sequence
would you'd sit with your back to me uh
with a blindfold on probably it's best
with a
blindfold and mine would then say you
know first trial look and so I'd stare
at the back of your neck you'd hear a
noise that indicates the beginning of
trial and within 5 or 10 seconds you
have to say whether you're being looked
at or not yes or no you can just say yes
or no it recognizes
voice so you can have the mobile phone
there so you hear the
sound the trial begins say yes and it
records that guess and then next trial
begins you know might be no I might be
told not to look at you I look at the
floor and think of something else or
close my eyes um
so that's my basic test for the sense of
being stared at and when you do that
test most people score above chance but
not very much above chance um about 55%
compared with 50% but some people can
get 60 or 70% or
80% so in this app what I want is for
people to try it out doing it with
feedback you know if you're told whether
you're right or wrong every time or even
if you just have a informal session
where
we were just had nothing else to do and
you sat with your back to me and I said
I'm going to look at you now Jesse I'm
looking at you and I'd say i' I've
stopped looking at you and I'm not
looking at you um and you would like by
a feedback you don't need to understand
it consciously bu a feedback where
people can learn to regulate their
heartbeat and so on and blood pressure
it's not conscious learning do this do
that in a logical sequence it's learning
unconscious cues
implicitly and so I think that this with
this system um which I'm just launching
now this app in fact anyone who's
listening to us who wants to try it can
go to my website I'll put the link in
the Des yes um because when people have
found out you know whether they can
improve what I want to find out is first
of all what works for people I don't
know what works that's why it's a
citizen science project M and then even
better if someone can find out what
works for them and can develop a system
where they can train other people to get
better at it it's basically it's a
matter of tuning into your feelings as
opposed to rational thoughts the minute
you start thinking about it well it was
meant to be random it was not looking
last time so it should be looking this
time you know as soon as you start that
kind of thinking it's gone but so it's a
matter of tuning into your thoughts and
then because there citizen science and
people are doing it at home then they
can find out does meditation affect it
are you more sensitive you've been
meditating does it work better under
cannabis or MDMA you know you couldn't
do this in a university with you imagine
ethics approval committies years of
deliberation and stuff but the fact is
you don't need all that people can just
do it it doesn't cost anything and
people can do it at home and the system
then gives feedback on how your scores
getting on and you can see if you're
improving or not and I'm asking people
if they can routinely get up to about
75% which is very significantly above
chance to write to me email me and let
me know so I'm hoping that I'll get
feedback on this experiment from people
who do experiments with their family and
friends me what's it called staring app
staring app download it now um what
about blind sight so this phenomena
where somebody's visual
impaired in the traditional sense and
then they can sort of in certain cases
actually literally artificially visually
impair themselves like be blindfolded
but they can somehow know when
somebody's in front of them or navigate
some you know treacherous terrain or
whatever and there's I think a site in
Texas that teaches people to kind of
develop these senses how does that
comport with your vision
model I don't know there's there's two
different things blind sight is where
monkeys or things that have or people
that had damage to the visual cortex of
the brain can behave as if they're
recognizing objects but they're not
consciously aware of it that's how it's
usually used in science but there's this
other thing which is often called
extraocular
Vision Beyond seeing without the eyes
where blindfolded people can tell what
things are and as it were see things
that they couldn't possibly be seeing
with their eyes and there are methods
that train children to do this that is
most successful with seven or eighty old
children uh who are the the best
subjects for this kind of thing uh
there's the whole group's training
children to do this in Mexico and in
Spain and I don't know whether there's
much happening in the US or Britain but
I know about it from Spain because I
have a colleague in Spain who's working
on this it's definitely more evidence
for morphic field and all the brain
injury stuff too where it's like you
have like 44% of your brain because of
some bizarre injury and then it's sort
of reassemble so that you're like
totally functional and you don't even
realize it for like a long like there
all these examples of that and so it's
semantic information does not seem like
it's locally
stored no I mean there's lots of
suggestive information uh suggestive
evidence for for all this extra ocular
Vision though is a a great puzzle I
don't pretend to understand how it works
um I mean I'm interested in it because
in a sense the scof of SE sense of being
stared at is a related thing because you
can detect when someone's looking at you
from behind and you're not doing it with
your eyes so they're they're vaguely
related and I wish I knew how so I mean
these are things I spend a lot of time
thinking about and I talked to
colleagues in parapsychology in physics
in other subject and nobody understands
these things we really are on the
frontiers of what we of the unknown with
all these phenomena let's talk about
it's a good segue because you brought up
Thomas so he wrote the structure of
scientific revolutions but he was
friends with actually John Mack who's a
head of the Harvard Psychiatry
department and who spent the end of his
life studying this sort of alien
abduction phenomena you wrote a book I
didn't even realize this until recently
called the physics of angels with was it
Matthew Fox with your co-author and I
find that to be a very interesting frame
when studying kind of UFOs and aliens
there's a religious studies Professor
named Diana Pula and there's a guy named
jacqu Val this French ufologist both of
whom believe that aliens are sort of the
Contemporary version of Angels and
Demons which if you apply a sort of
Lindy like what's the most tried and
true humanistic to this stuff it's
probably that so what what motivated you
to write that book and what what are the
physics of
angels well what really motivated me was
the idea that there are forms of
intelligence or Consciousness above the
human level beyond the human level like
the sun and the stars and I've been
interested in the idea of conscious sun
and stars for a long time I mean my
paper on the subject was much more
recent um and because the climate has
changed within science you know pan
psychism is now a live topic of debate
and I wouldn't have stood a chance of
publishing a paper in scientific journal
on this know 20 years
ago um so I you know when I was thinking
about you know the idea that the stars
are conscious and the the the the
planets may be conscious too
um I I became aware that in the Middle
Ages and in standard thought in
Christian
universities influenced by you know St
Thomas aquinus and all the great
theologians and philosophers of the time
it was taken for granted that the
Universe was alive it was Tak taken for
granted that nature animals and plants
were beings with Souls that they were
animate that's why we call animals
animals because animal means Soul in
Latin um and you know this was before
the 17th century the machine theory of
nature medieval Christianity was
essentially animistic and treated all of
nature as alive and they thought that
each star or Planet had its own
intelligence it was not only alive but
intelligent and
its guiding Angel so there was a whole
category of angels which were organizing
or being the intelligences of the
heavenly bodies um there were other
angels that were the is it where the
intelligences guiding or organizing
process on Earth and there others that
were kind of cosmic archetypes of
Consciousness so there were nine levels
of angels based in
three areas is this an aquinus this is
in ainus it's in Dionysus the areopagite
who was a sixth Century Syrian monk um
who had a huge influence on Christian
theology as did amus also Syrian
neoplatonist his own Angel hierarchy
well dionis the areopagite was a was a
neoplatonist um and so what because I
was interested the idea of intelligence
is beyond the human level there was no
need to reinvent this because that's
what our ancestors you know because
Jewish philosophers and Islamic
philosophers all have angels and the
Bible is full of angels both the Old and
the New Testament um um so in the whole
judeo-christian and Islamic tradition
you have these beings at different
levels and Matthew Fox is a friend of
mine he's a
theologian and so when I was discussing
it with him I said well you know what
about these medieval theories of angels
they've already got idea of lots of
intelligences beyond the human level is
it relevant today of dionis the arop St
Thomas aquinus and Hilgard of bingan the
Visionary medieval abis in Germany who
was a Mystic and a poet um and we chose
the most interesting passages in in
their books about angels the most
relevant ones and then we discussed each
short passage as a dialogue and that's
what the book is really and it's looking
at the traditional ideas of Angels in
the western tradition and how these
ideas might be relevant today as we
think about Consciousness beyond the
human
level so it's not that we're saying
there's sort of beings with colored
wings as seen in stained glass windows
flying around in the universe I mean
people may experience them that way but
that would be their own subjective
projection onto them it is fascinating
though when you look at St Thomas
aquinus Angel hierarchy or amus or uh
I'm sure
diasis you you see these specific
attributes uh that they tie to specific
Angel categories yes and some do
actually comport with the modern alien
phenomena so you'll see like irradiated
light you know electromagnetic you know
now you know they wouldn't use the word
electromagnetic IR radiated light or
whatever m lingering effects as a result
of that and so it does it's it's very
interesting that like you know maybe
maybe we're just seeing this sort of
age-old thing with a modern Motif or
analytical overlay that we're kind of
imposing on you know the
past do
you investigate any of the UFO stuff or
the alien stuff at all or I haven't no I
know there I investigate a lot of
different things but there's a limit to
how much I can look at um and I'm an
experimental Scientist by nature and I
love doing experiments and things the
things that attract me in science are
things where I can do actual experiments
EOS are very hard to do experiments with
you basically is observational and you
have to wait for them to come along and
stuff um so it's not an area that I've
ever felt drawn to because it's so
elusive from experimental point of view
and also it's so clouded with conspiracy
theories and coverups and all that kind
of thing so I'm not very interested in
conspiracy theories all that stuff I
what I prefer to do is is focus on what
I call the mysteries of everyday life
like the sense of being stared at which
as you said at least 90% of the
population have experienced it it's
common everyone knows about it even
children um but it's totally unexplained
and then telepathy like telephone
telepathy thinking of someone who who's
about to call or knowing who's calling
virtually everyone is about 85% of the
population that you can do experiments
on that have done lots and I'm pretty
sure it's real um and then animals that
have these abilities better than humans
and that was the subject of my book dogs
that know when their owners are coming
home yes I have a lot of Investigations
unexplained powers of animals which not
only about telepathy which dogs that
know when their AIDS are coming home
theonomous theme of the book is about
telepathy but also things like animals
giving warnings of earthquakes and
tsunamis feeling the future is there
something about because I think about
what is adaptive in mankind and it's
like prefrontal cortex or what would
what would proverbially know be known as
kind of a left brain or like rational
thinking and that seems seems to get in
the way of this like instinctive like I
remember when we met with you six years
ago you were talking about psychics
generally being like kind of
marginalized sometimes destitute
sometimes physically impaired in your
account maybe it was this was sort of
your own anecdotal belief but then you
know if it's like that and and animals
or something it's like you're more
tapped in if you're not you know engaged
in this kind of heady ego thing yes and
children yes I mean what inhibits these
things is Extreme left brain type
rational activity therefore the very
worst kind of people for these
experiments are subjects are University
professors and students and so on you
know the academic world is is is the
most hostile world not only
theoretically but also in tone practical
terms for these things because you're
dealing with a a subpopulation that
excessively developed verbal left brain
type thinking you're so out of touch
with your instincts you're just it's
really it is the modern religion like I
think about cosmology itself and it's
like just patches upon patches of Like
Making Stuff work whether it's like
gravity which doesn't make any sense
dark matter which is undetectable like
we're probably just way off on
everything I think we're way off on lots
of things yeah
and just not what have ever engaged me
as much is these things which are so
much more Central to our everyday life
and our concerns you said you were
reading Faraday uh which you know you're
going way back to the beginning of
magnetism what inspired you to read
Faraday and what have you learned or
uncovered in that
process I'm trying to understand the um
the very nature of electromagnetism and
light and because I think they're so
closely related to
Consciousness as we discussed earlier I
think they're the interface with
Consciousness where do you and I realize
you'd probably be speculating here but
let's demarcate this as speculation
where do you think the consensus is
possibly off on our conventional
understanding of electromagnetism or
light well I think the consensus is off
on VIR the whole of physics in so far as
it ignores Consciousness totally you
know if you look at physics textbooks or
physics there's nothing whatever about
Consciousness there and
sometimes you can ask an intelligent
physicist you know why isn't there he
said well physics isn't about
Consciousness it's about physical things
you know psychologists maybe biologists
studi Consciousness we don't it's not
our area but that's true and it's a
reasonable response but the thing is
that biologists in mechanistic biology
the dominant kind say that what we want
to do is reduce all life and mind to
chemistry molecular biology and then to
physics and once we've reduced it to
physics we've explained it and since
there's no consciousness in physics then
they think there can't be any anywhere
else either and um so we've got this
ridiculous situation where physicists
don't have Consciousness in it because
they're not studying Consciousness then
everyone else thinks physics is the
foundation of the whole of science if
it's not in physics it can't exist right
that's then you get the hard problem you
know it ought not to exist at all yeah
um yeah it's weird because it all came
from decart but really decart is saying
Consciousness is all that exists or
something but it came from the it turns
into this radical doubt of your own kind
of
epistemological view or something and
you're just a brain and a vad and you
know is radical skepticism applied to
everything when in fact it's really all
all you can presuppose is consciousness
or take a priority as Consciousness well
what dayart did was just split the world
into Consciousness which is God angels
and human minds and matter or nature
which is conscious and follows
mechanical laws and so for the from the
17th in the 18th century most people
went along with that and it meant that
it divided the realm of Science and
religion so you could still have
religion about God angels morality human
Minds Etc um and science could go on
looking at nature and ignoring
Consciousness but then in the 19th
century with the rise of materialism and
Atheism and Atheism and materialism are
more or less the same thing um because
materialism says there's only
unconscious matter in the universe um
then Garden Angels were just sort of
rubbed out you know you know just
eliminate Goden Angels then all that's
left of consci is the human mind and
then that has then to become the matter
of the brain so decart actually had God
and angels and the whole Realm Of
Consciousness but he said it's not in
space and time it's supernatural and
it's not extended in space um and so the
mind is is outside space and time and so
is consciousness so let's go back to the
farad where where do you think uh the
consensus is off on light and
electromagnetism and I realize you'd be
sort of speculating here but if you were
to if you were to just take a
guess well I think that I don't think
it's exactly off I think it's what's
that there's something about
electromagnetism and Light which are
related to Consciousness and as you
mentioned earlier John Joe mcfaden
thinks that the conscious the fields of
our brains the electromagnetic fields of
our brains are the basis of our
Consciousness that that he thinks
electromagnetism is
consciousness I don't go that far I
don't don't agree with that I think it's
the interface I think there sort of
quantum processes electromagnetic
processes morphic fields and mind and
Consciousness here electromagnetism do
bridge between them um
and you see Faraday uh
was not a materialist Faraday believed
that the Ultimate Reality in the
universe is force that the whole of
fields of force the whole of space is
filled with fields of force and he
thought matter arose from these fields
by being sort of concentrated fields in
particular points or places but Fields
were primary for
Faraday and he thought of Mag magnetic
fields as having lines of force and he
thought the lines of force were like
tubes through which the ether flowed or
some fluid flowed so did Maxwell in his
original equations of electromagnetism
treated the fields of the fields of of
force the lines of force as like tubes
with a spiraling Vortex
activity well parad thought the the the
lines of force were physical that you
see them when you scatter iron fings
around a magnet you actually see lines
and um if you want to compute magnetic
field intensity it's the number of lines
going through a particular area the
number of lines of Force if you look in
a modern textbook it has the lines of
force and it has the field intensity
based on the number of lines of force
but then it says after it's described
and explained everything in terms of
these lines of Force he says but these
lines of force are of course only
imaginary and a convenience for thinking
about this so they use them their whole
Theory depends on they say well they
don't really exist and yet um parad was
convinced they do exist that they're the
physical basis of these phenomena so I'm
trying to understand you know how
magnetism and electricity are related he
thought it was The Ether and flows fluid
what are lines of force what is it
that's flowing through these lines of
force and if it's flowing which
directions it flowing in from the future
to the past or from the past to the
future or both because I think light you
see Maxwell's equations for light which
were influenced by Faraday's thinking
show that light uh the equations work
equally well if when I see you the the
light moves from you to me or whether
the the something moves from me to you
the equations work that was the basis of
the transactional
theory Richard feineman in
1945 wrote a key paper with wheeler who
was a key figur in uh um astronomy and
gravitational Theory um and in they
dealt with this the the the the roots of
the transaural interpretation the
bidirectionality from future to past and
past to future and in the famous Fineman
diagrams uh you know you have lines of
particles interacting um a line you can
have lines going backwards in time a
positron according to F Fineman a
positively charged electron is an
electron going backwards in time so
fineman's thinking was shot through with
this it can go both ways in time and I
think that the light and
electromagnetism have this quality and I
think the bit that goes from future to
past is probably related to the to
Consciousness because of this reverse
causal flow of Consciousness and that is
somehow the interface with
Consciousness so I'm if you look in a
modern physics textbook within sort of
two lines or into a kind of wall of
equations which create a kind of fog
which stops you thinking about it
because if you can't follow the
equations you you think oh just leave
the physicist thinking about magnetism
or matter or something um but I'm trying
to think about it without the fog of
equations and and and see what what's
actually really going on and Faraday was
not approaching this mathematically he
didn't own any Mass he was approaching
it as phenomena that actually interact
how does light interact with magnetism
he did experiments he found that
magnetic fields Chang the polarization
of lights and that tells you the light
is magnetic or has a magnetic aspect and
he discovered that empirically by
looking at what changed it do you think
we need to resuscitate The Ether or that
um space is in fact empty or or full you
know this is obviously a debate between
bergon and Einstein and you have the
Michaelson Morley experiments of the
1890s where you know they did a set of
these sort of optical detections and
they're like you know we're not
detecting The Ether but I I've always
thought you know the the uh absence of
evidence is not the evidence of absence
and people like Fineman later you know
like you know you could you could take
uh you could boil all of the world's
oceans you know with just a single cup
of coffee and so like may maybe there is
actually a lot of energy in empty space
well that's the standard view in quantum
theory the so-called zero point field or
Quantum vacuum field is supposed to be
full of energy and virtual particles pop
out of it and go back into it all the
time and I mean that's part of quantum
electrodynamics which feinan was you
know an expert in and Quantum
electrodynamics is often said to be the
most accurate Theory that's ever been
devised I agree with you but general
relativity would you know and there's
even actually a paper I think in 1923
where Einstein says general relativity
is in fact compatible with The Ether so
he sort of goes back on you know his
Deni you know special relativity denied
it and then depends what you mean by it
you see because the thing is that
different people is the Quantum vacuum
field The Ether is the higs field which
hix bosons couple to The Ether which is
separate from the quantum vacuum field
are is the is there a fluid flowing
through magnetic lines of force uh the
ether as Maxwell thought you see the
particular theory that Einstein the
Mickelson mly experiment was about was a
theory that there's a uniform ether
spread out equally through space and
time like a framework for the whole of
the universe and that um if the Earth's
moving in One Direction relative to
another you know it should affect the
light and so forth that was a particular
theory of the ether as the carrier of
light uniformly distributed but you see
these other theories of The Ether are
completely different theories and aren't
refuted by Michelson moley um and I'm
not sure how helpful they are or you
know something's going on whether it
helps to call it the ether I don't know
right maybe it's more of a field
variable or you can have vacuum
polarization or something but um I want
to get to two topics before we end here
uh one is your son uh uh Merlin
sheldrake has written a fantastic book
about fungi and fungal intelligence it's
called entangled life and um do you look
at that at all are you interested in
that at all oh certainly I am yes I mean
he's
I think is an amazing book um because he
weaves together so many different
philosophical ideas History of Science
field ecology you know modern
electrophysiology and so forth and you
got into some of the Paras pychology
stuff through botony is that right am I
making that up I started out working in
plant science in botony yes I worked on
plant development and then I spent years
in India working in an agricultural
Research Institute on um breeding chick
better chick peas and pigeon peas I my
title there was principal plant
physiologist so I was working with plant
breeders um in developing improved crops
for not just India but for the semian
tropics in general and some of the
varieties we developed are in widespread
use and have made a major difference and
so on so my own background really is
working with
plants um and Merlin well his is fungi
not plants and as he'd be the first to
point out fungi are separate and
different from Plants they're not the
same All Animal Kingdom they're a
separate Kingdom um funga as the fungal
Kingdom as opposed to plant kingdom or
the animal kingdom or the microbial
World
um well no I think
mens what he does in his book is is
really remarkable scientifically and
also in a literary way because it's
incredibly well
written um
well M and I quite close in in you know
we get on well together we his interest
in Sciences as he says in that book
himself you know obviously influenced by
my own and and you were friends with
Terence McKenna you were fairly close
with him right oh very close yes and so
I I think I think Fung guy are so
interesting and this is really me
ripping off McKenna here but I think
they're really interesting because of
how similar they are to to humans so
they're really bioavailable humans are
susceptible to fungal disease everybody
has you know microbiome associated with
their
microbiome and he was having some like
two week trip in the Amazon McKenna and
he said that the the mushroom spoke to
him and I think it's called the song of
the mushroom or something the mushroom
spoke to him and he said within my
memory exists the knowledge for
hyperlight drives and so it's this crazy
idea that mushrooms are extremophiles
and you even have Francis Crick and who
I know is also a former associate of
yours uh in 1973 writing a paper about
you know P directed pans spermia in 1981
he wrote what is life kind of developing
that this idea that if you had a
kardashev four scale you know
Intergalactic civilization it probably
wouldn't look like hominids like us you
would have this Spore of knowledge or
memory it would be able to travel the
cosmos and uh withstand extreme
radiation and then it would merge with
life forms like us and like direct our
thoughts and behaviors I mean I'm sure
you've seen videos of bullet ants in the
Amazon Corp mushrooms that literally
like take over their bodies and direct
them up a tree and our microbiome you
know affects the way we think our
microbiome obviously does too so I find
that just this like fascinating herur
istic yeah well I discusses that in his
book of course the the fungi taking over
minds and where to what degree they
affect our minds and um I think Terren
was McKenna was a factor in Marin's
development I mean after all Terence was
one of my very good friends whenever he
was in London he stayed with us here
there's some hermetic wisdom transfer
well ter you know Mar was fascinated by
Terren and and listened to a lot of his
tapes and things and and knew him
personally so but
I don't think thoughts I don't think we
necessarily need spores traveling around
an actual fungi to transfer thoughts if
telepathy happens it's possible that
beings on other planets could
communicate with us telepathically you
know without the need for all this sort
of space hardware
and hyperdrives and walks and things U
so uh you know and there are people who
claim that they're they get thoughts
from other dimensions and stuff and some
of them could be on other planets who
knows um so my own approach if I were
doing space exploration would be to
concentrate on telepathy rather than on
sort of heavy engineering and it
certainly be cheaper um and we might
find out more which is really
interesting because most astronauts will
come back from space and the work that
will that they will be doing will be
Consciousness related not at all hard
science or figuring out how we can get
further it turns it entirely turns
inwards but well Edgar Mitchell was a
astronaut who'd been to the moon and
into space at least and and he founded
the Institute of netic Sciences of which
I'm a fellow and which is one of the
main organizations in the United States
involved in Consciousness research so
that in a sense does tie in with
experience in space absolutely and uh I
guess final thing you know AI is all the
rage now people are worried about what
it means for mankind and I was actually
with a founder of a pretty prominent
company I really respect him he's kind
of an intellectual in his own right as
well and he was saying you know he
thinks you know these limited language
models have all these local limits it's
not real Consciousness all the stuff
that we would probably say but as far as
kind of Turing passible you know
intelligence
it's going to approach you know what our
abilities and so the last Bastion the
last sort of uh safe hold for mankind is
self-identification is is literally
figuring out we have this impulse to
figure out who we are and so I know
you've pointed out sort of you know
other limits of AI around you know um
how it's it doesn't have kind of a
creative principle we sort of direct it
to do things and then you know that kind
of reflects in the output but yeah what
what do you think there what do you
think about Ai and are we just AI oh I
don't think we're AI at all I mean how
AI actually works is is accumulating
vast amounts of data and and um I mean
the the one that interests me most is is
the Deep Mind thing on Alpha fold yes uh
for protein
structure and see what's interesting
there is that it's not possible to
predict the structure of protein
molecules given their primary sequence
of amino acids from first principles you
know people have tried for years and you
know they think it can all be explained
just in terms of regular physics and
chemistry but if you try doing it that
way from first principles you don't get
anywhere if you if you try calculating
the minimum energy structure to which
your thing would go according to normal
physics with a complex protein you have
hundreds or thousands of minimal energy
structures that are almost the same and
yet it gets to one of those rather than
the others they had to manually hardcode
the bond angles of the protein to make
it work well they well they they they
find it really hard to do anything that
that gives you a correct prediction and
it's called the multiple minimum problem
but what AI does what Alpha fold does it
doesn't even attempt to predict how they
fold up from the beginning and and um on
first principles it just looks at
thousands and thousands and thousands of
proteins and then finds an unknown one
with a Amo acid sequence that's similar
to some of the others and sort of
figures out what it might be based on
lots of others like facial recognition
software doesn't understand the
embryology of the face and how the
muscles work and so it just Compares
millions of photos of people's faces
it's pattern matching it's pattern
matching and it's pattern matching
that's always based on an initial subset
of human supervised learning or usually
outside of certain cases of
reinforcement learning like Alpha gozero
which are rare and require very rule
bound games it's almost all based on
these sort of manually supervised
learning models yeah so I mean I think
it's it's it's amazing what it can do
it's sort of the alpha fold things
particularly amazing because people have
tried predicting protein structure for
years and now they can predict them on
an industrial scale this software
um but it's not a fundamental
understanding it's not real intelligence
and the computer's not conscious of what
it's doing um and so I don't think it
has very much to tell us about
Consciousness and the teering test in my
opinion is a silly test anyway and and
so if a computer can simulate you know
behave and respond to questions a bit
like a person um I don't think this is
know if churing were alive today I think
he'd move on when he proposed this in
what 1950s or something when computers
could barely do what an ordinary
calculator desktop calculator can do
today
um that would have seemed a very
advanced level of computation then and
it is an advanced level of computation
but it certainly doesn't prove their
conscious and it's a very poor test for
trying to prove someone's conscious if
you had to predict the next big
scientific breakthrough what area do you
think it would be
in in Consciousness studies and and to
do with a deeper understanding of the
extended mind the way minds work the way
they're related to light and
electromagnetic
fields um and the way that memory and
nature Works through morphic
resonance these would be my favorite
candidates and they're the ones I work
on because because I think that there
this is where the next really big change
in science is going to come and which
will totally change our Paradigm from
the way it is now well it was an honor
to speak with you I really appreciate it
rert a pleasure Jesse